```@meta
CurrentModule = AtomsCalculators
```

# Interface Definition

The `AtomsCalculator` interface is designed to provide easy to use and easy to read high level functions for standard molecular mechanics, while at the same time being flexible and extensible. Moreover the flexible low-level interface is designed to be compatible with [`Lux.jl`](https://lux.csail.mit.edu/stable/) to enable training of parameterized models. Due to this tension (ease of use vs flexibility) there are two alternative ways to call and implement the interface, which are described in separate sections below. 

A new calculator need not implement the entire interface, or indeed both interfaces to be useful. Moreover, `AtomsCalculators` provides utility macros to help with the implementation. **(TODO: needs xref)**

Most interface functions have two common inputs: an `AtomsBase.AbstractSystem{D}` compatible structure and a "calculator" that specifies details of the calculation method. Throughout this documentation: 
- `sys` : always specifies a system, usually an `AtomsBase.AbstractSystem{D}`
- `calc` : always specifies a calculator implementing (part of) the `AtomsCalculators` interface. 

## High-Level Molecular Mechanics Interface 

The high-level interface provides function prototypes for potential energy, forces and [virial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virial_stress) calculations.  It assumes that calculators are not parameterized or store their own parameters and/or state.

### Minimal high-level interface

A minimal implementation of an `AtomsCalculators` calculator should provide (however, see alternatives below)
- [`energy_unit(calc)`](@ref) : return energy unit used by the calculator
- [`length_unit(calc)`](@ref) : return length unit used by the calculator
- [`potential_energy(sys, calc; kwargs...)`](@ref) : return potential energy of the system as a `Unitful.Energy`
- [`forces(sys, calc; kwargs...)`](@ref) return forces as an `AbstractVector{SVector{D, <: Unitful.Force}}`
- [`virial(sys, calc; kwargs...)`](@ref) return virial (not stress!) as a `SMatrix{D, D, Unitful.Energy}`

- Methods must accept keyword arguments, but they can be ignored. For a list of standard keyword arguments that a calculator may wish to support see ????TBD???? 
- If a calculator does not implement a function, then it can simply choose to provide that method. A simulator that relies on that function will then simply fail. For example a QM/MM force mixing scheme cannot provide `potential_energy`. 

### Extended high-level interface 

The extended interface can be automatically generated from the minimal interface, but for various reasons (in particular performance), some calculators may prefer to implement their own methods for the following functions.

Several utility functions are derived from `energy_unit` and `force_unit` which can be overloaded by a calculator implementation: 
- [`force_unit(calc)`](@ref) : compute force unit from energy and length units 
- [`zero_energy(sys, calc)`](@ref) : initialize potential energy 
- [`zero_forces(sys, calc)`](@ref) : initilize a force vector 
- [`zero_virial(sys, calc)`](@ref) : initialize a virial matrix 

A calculator may provide non-allocating and or combined calculations that can sometimes be preferred for performance reasons. These can also be generated by the [`@generate_interface`](@ref) macro. All of these return results as a `NamedTuple`.

- [`energy_forces(sys, calc)`](@ref)
- [`energy_forces!(f, sys, calc)`](@ref)
- [`energy_forces_virial(sys, calc)`](@ref)
- [`energy_forces_virial!(f, sys, calc)`](@ref)


## Low-Level Interface 

All high-level functionality listed above can also be accessed via "low-level" calls with user-specifiable parameters through `calculate` methods. The low-level `calculate` interface follows the [Lux](https://lux.csail.mit.edu/stable/) model for parameters and state. This means that when calculations are performed with the `calculate` interface calculators must act as **immutable** structs that are passed 
to the `calculate` function together with `parameters` and `state`. All calculations then return an output and a state. Note we only require calculators **act** immutable but not to be technically immutable. For example the same calculator can implement the high-level interface and then mutate an internal state.

### General structure of the low-level interface 

The general usage of the `calculate` function is
- [`calculate(property, sys, calc, ps, st; kwargs...)](@ref)
where,
- `property` is the property to be computed e.g. `PotentialEnergy()`,
- `sys` is an system, 
- `calc` is a calculator, 
- `ps` either `nothing` or a nested `NamedTuple` storing the calculator parameters,
- `st` either `nothing` or a nested `NamedTuple` storing the calculator state

The return type is always a `NamedTuple` with keys indicating the name of the property being computed. The content of this `NamedTuple` is not required to be restricted to the requested property (or, properties - see below). 

To manage parameters and state, `AtomsCalculators` provides prototypes that must be overloaded: 
- [`get_state(calc)`](@ref)
- [`set_state!(calc)`](@ref)
- [`get_parameters(calc)`](@ref)
- [`set_parameters!(calc)`](@ref)

### Molecular mechanics with the low-level interface 

- `calculate(Energy(), sys, calc, ps, st)` is analogous to `potential_energy(sys, calc)`
- `calculate(Forces(), sys, calc, ps, st)` is analogous to `forces(sys, calc)`
- `calculate(Virial(), sys, calc, ps, st)` is analogous to `virial(sys, calc)`

### Multiple properties 



### Extensions 









# Previous Version of Interface Docs

There are two alternative ways to call the interface: using functions `potential_energy`, `forces` and [virial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virial_stress), or using `calculate`
function together with `Energy`, `Forces` and `Virial`.

Individual calls are implemented by dispatching `AtomsCalculators` functions

- `AtomsCalculators.potential_energy` for potential energy calculation
- `AtomsCalculators.forces` for allocating force calculation and/or...
- `AtomsCalculators.forces!` for non-allocating force calculation
- `AtomsCalculators.virial` for [virial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virial_stress) calculation

The `calculate` interface is implemented by dispatching to

- `AtomsCalculators.calculate` using `AtomsCalculators.Energy()` as the first argument for energy calculation
- `AtomsCalculators.calculate` using `AtomsCalculators.Forces()` as the first argument for forces calculaton
- `AtomsCalculators.calculate` using `AtomsCalculators.Virial()` as the first argument for virial calculation

You do not need to implement all of these by yourself. There is macro that will help implement the other calls. 

Each of the individual calls have two common inputs: `AtomsBase.AbstractSystem` compatible structure and a `calculator` that incudes details of the calculation method. Calculate interface has additionally the type of calculation as the first input. You can tune calculation by passing keyword arguments, which can be ignored, but they need to be present in the function definition.

## High-level vs Low-level Interface

The philosophy behing AtomsCalculators.jl is to provide high-level calls with default 
parameters through `potential_energy`, `forces`, `forces!` and `virial` and low-level calls 
with user-specifiable parameters through `calculate`. 

The low-level `calculate` interface follows the [Lux](https://lux.csail.mit.edu/stable/) model for parameters and state. This means that calculators are **immutable** structs that are passed 
to the `calculate` function together with `parameters` and `state`. All calculations then return 
an output and a state.

When implementing a new calculator, two paths can be chosen:

1. **Providing a full low level implementation**
    In this setup, one implements `calculate` for the various type of 
    calculations to be supported, with full handling of parameters and state. **On top of that**, 
    one should provide sensible **defaults** for calls with parameters and state set to `nothing`. 
    These will be used to generate the high-level calls.
2. **Only implementing high-level calls**
    In this case, one only implements the high-level `potential_energy`, `forces` and `virial` 
    (or some of them). Appropriate low-level implementation for `calculate` is then automatically 
    generated by using and returning dummy state and parameters set to `nothing`.

Note that when using the high-level approach, fixed parameters are allowed to be bundled inside the calculator.

### Method Signatures

`potential_energy`, `forces`, `forces!` and `virial`:

- First input is `AtomsBase.AbstractSystem` compatible structure
- Second input is `calculator` structure
- Method has to accept keyword arguments (they can be ignored)
- Non-allocating force call `force!` has an AbstractVector as the first input, to which the evaluated force values are stored (look for more details below)

`calculate`:

- First input is either `Energy()`, `Forces()` or `Virial()`
- Second is `AtomsBase.AbstractSystem` compatible structure
- Third is `calculator` structure
- Fourth is `parameters`
- Fifth is `state`
- Method has to accept keyword arguments (they can be ignored)

## Output

Outputs for the functions need to have following properties

- Energy is a subtype of `Number` that has a unit with dimensions of energy (mass * length^2 / time^2)
- Force output is a subtype of `AbstractVector` with element type also a subtype of AbstractVector (length 3 in 3D) and unit with dimensions of force (mass * length / time^2). With additional property that it can be reinterpret as a matrix
- Virial is a square matrix (3x3 in 3D) that has units of force times length or energy
- Calculate methods return a [NamedTuple](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/base/#Core.NamedTuple) that uses keys `:energy`, `:forces` and `:virial` to identify the results, which have the types defined above, and additionally returns the updated `:state`.

## Implementing the interface

You can either implement both of the calls e.g. for energy

`AtomsCalculators.potential_energy(system, calculator; kwargs...)` and
`AtomsCalculators(AtomsCalculators.Energy(), system, calculator; kwargs...)`

### Example implementations

Example `potential_energy` implementation

```julia
using AtomsCalculators
using Unitful
struct MyType
end

AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.potential_energy(system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition here
    return 0.0u"eV"
end
```

Completely equivalent implementation is

```julia
AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.calculate(::AtomsCalculators.Energy, system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition here
    return ( energy = 0.0u"eV, )
end
```

Example `virial` implementation

```julia
AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.virial(system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition here
    return zeros(3,3) * u"eV"
end
```

Equivalent implementation is

```julia
AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.calculate(::AtomsCalculators.Virial, system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition here
    return ( virial = zeros(3,3) * u"eV", )
end
```

### Implementing forces call

Basic example

```julia
AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.forces(system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition
    return AtomsCalculators.zero_forces(system, calculator)
end
```

This creates both `forces` and `forces!` and `calculate` command with `Forces()` support.

`AtomsCalculators.zero_forces(system, calculator)` is a function that creates zero forces for a given calculator and system combo. You can use this function to tune your force output.

Same way `AtomsCalculators.promote_force_type(system, calculator)` creates a force type for the calculator for given input that can be used to allocate force data. You can also allocate for some other type, of your choosing or use the default one. You can overload `promote_force_type` for your force type, this is automatically used by `zero_forces` command to change the element type. If you wan to change array type overload `zero_forces` for your calculator.

Alternatively the definition could have been done with

```julia
AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.calculate(::AtomsCalculators.Forces, system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition
    return ( forces = zeros(AtomsCalculators.promote_force_type(system, calculator), length(system)), )
end
```

or with non-allocating forces

```julia
struct MyOtherType
end

AtomsCalculators.@generate_interface function AtomsCalculators.forces!(f::AbstractVector, system, calculator::MyOtherType; kwargs...)
    @assert length(f) == length(system)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition
    for i in eachindex(f)
        # forces! adds to the force array
        f[i] += zero(AtomsCalculators.promote_force_type(system, calculator))
    end

    return f
end
```

## Other Automatically Generated Calls

Many methods have optimized calls when energy and forces (and/or virial) are calculated together. To allow access to these calls there are also calls

- `energy_forces` for potential energy and allocating forces
- `energy_forces!` for potential energy and non-allocating forces
- `energy_forces_virial` for potential energy, allocating forces and virial
- `energy_forces_virial!` for potential energy, non-allocating forces and virial

These all are generated automatically, if you have defined the corresponding individual methods. The main idea here is that you can implement more efficient methods by yourself.

Example implementation

```julia
function AtomsCalculators.potential_energy_forces(system, calculator::MyType; kwargs...)
    # we can ignore kwargs... or use them to tune the calculation
    # or give extra information like pairlist

    # add your own definition here
    E = 0.0u"eV"
    f = zeros(AtomsCalculators.default_force_eltype, length(system))
    return (;
        :energy => E,
        :forces => f
    )
end
```

Defining this does not overload the corresponding non-allocating call - you need to do that separately.

Output for the combination methods is defined to have keys `:energy`, `:forces` and `:virial`. You can access them with

- `output[:energy]` for energy
- `output[:forces]` for forces
- `output[:virial]` for viral

The type of the output can be [NamedTuple](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/base/#Core.NamedTuple), as was in the example above, or any structure that has the keys implemented and also supports splatting. The reason for this is that this allows everyone to implement the performance functions without being restricted to certain output type, and to allow using `haskey` to check the output.

## Testing Function Calls

We have implemented function calls to help you testing the API. There is one call for each type of calls

- `test_potential_energy` to test potential_energy call
- `test_forces` to test both allocating and non-allocating force calls
- `test_virial` to test virial call
- `test_energy_forces` to test both potential energy and force calls
- `test_energy_forces_virial` to test everything 

To get these access to these functions you need to call

```julia
using AtomsCalculators.AtomsCalculatorsTesting
```

To test our example potential `MyType` we can do

```julia
using AtomsBase
using AtomsCalculators.AtomsCalculatorsTesting

hydrogen = isolated_system([
    :H => [0, 0, 0.]u"Å",
    :H => [0, 0, 1.]u"Å"
])

test_potential_energy(hydrogen, MyType())
test_forces(hydrogen, MyType())
test_virial(hydrogen, MyType())

test_forces(hydrogen, MyOtherType()) # this works
test_virial(hydrogen, MyOtherType()) # this will fail

# If you have energy and forces implemented use this over others
test_energy_forces(hydrogen, MyType())

# If you have energy, forces and virial implemented use this others
test_energy_forces_virial(hydrogen, MyType())
```

*It is recommended that you use the test functions to test that your implementation supports the API fully!*
